# Homework 10 
Prove props. 6.5, 6.6. Do projects 6.7(ii-vi), 6.8(i-iii). (M 3/31)  

## Proposition 6.5
Assume we are given an equivalence relation on a set A. For all $a, b\in A$:  
$[a] = [b] \text{ or } [a] \cap [b] =\empty$  

**Proof.**  
It suffices to prove that the two statement are mutually exclusive, and that if one is false, than the other must be true.  

Prove that $[a] = [b] \text{ and } [a] \cap [b] =\empty$ cannot both be true.  

$[a] \text{ and } [b]$ are equivalence classes, and equivalence classes are sets. We know these sets are nonempty, because proposition 6.4 states that $a\in [a]$ for any equivalence class $[a]$.  
Since $[a] = [b]$, $[a] \cap [b] = [a] \cap [a] = [a]$, and we know $[a]\neq \empty$.  
$\therefore [a] = [b] \text{ and } [a] \cap [b] =\empty$ cannot both be true.  

Now, prove that if one statement is false, then the other must be true.  

By definition, $[a] = \{x\in A \text{ | } x\sim a\}$, and $[b] = \{x\in A \text{ | } x\sim b\}$  
Using the definitions, $[a] \cap[b] = \{x\in A \text{ | } x\sim a \text{ and } x\sim b\}$  

*Case 1: Assume $[a]\neq [b]$.  Prove $[a] \cap [b] = \empty$.  

By proposition 6.4(ii), since $[a]\neq[b]$, $a\nsim b$  
The statements $x\sim a \text{ and } x\sim b$ cannot both be true, as both being true would imply by transitivity that $a\sim b$, which we know is false. Therefore, no element $x\in A$ satisfies the constraints of $[a] \cap[b]$.  
$\therefore [a] \cap[b] = \empty$  

Case 2: Assume $[a] \cap [b] \neq \empty$.  Prove $[a] = [b]$.  

If $[a] \cap [b]\neq \empty$, then there must exist some $x\in A$ that satisfies both statements $x\sim a \text{ and } x\sim b$. If $x\sim a$ and $x\sim b$, then by transitivity, $a\sim b$. By proposition 6.4(ii), since $a\sim b$, $[a]=[b]$.  
$\therefore [a]=[b]$  

**QED.**  

## Proposition 6.6
Given an equivalence relation on A, its equivalence classes form a partition of A. Conversely, given a partition $\Pi$ of A, deﬁne $\sim$ by a $\sim$ b if and only if a and b lie in the same element of $\Pi$. Then $\sim$ is an equivalence relation.  

The definition of a partition states:  
Let $\Pi$ be a partition of a set $A$. If $p_1, p_2\in\Pi$ and $p_1 \neq p_2$, then $p_1 \cap p_2 = \empty$ and every $a\in A$ belongs to some $p\in\Pi$.  

Part 1: Given an equivalence relation on A, its equivalence classes form a partition of A.  

**Proof.**  

Let $P:=A/\sim$, where $\sim$ is some equivalence relation.  
To prove that the equivalence classes in $P$ form a partition, we must prove that if $[a], [b]\in P$ and $[a]\neq [b]$, then $[a] \cap [b] = \empty$. We must also prove that every $a\in A$ belongs to some $p\in P$.  

Using the proof for *\*Case 1* in proposition 6.5, we know that $[a] \neq [b]\implies [a]\cap[b]=\empty$. Using proposition 6.4(i), we know any element $a\in A$ belongs to its own equivalence class, $[a]$, therefore every $a\in A$ must belong to a set in $P$, as $P$ is defined to be the set of equivalence classes of $A$.  
**QED.**  

Part 2: Given a partition $\Pi$ of $A$, deﬁne $\sim$ by a $\sim$ b if and only if a and b lie in the same element of $\Pi$. Then $\sim$ is an equivalence relation.  

**Proof.**  
Reflexitivity: For some $a\in A$, $a$ belongs to the same $p\in\Pi$ as $a$. Therefore, $a\sim a$, by our definition of the relation $\sim$.  
Symmetry: For some $a, b\in A$, $a\sim b$ imples $a,b$ belong to the same $p\in \Pi$, which in turn implies $b\sim a$.  
Transitivity: For some $a, b, c\in A$, $a\sim b$ and $b\sim c$ implies $a,b,c$ all belong to the same $p\in \Pi$, which in turn implies $a\sim c$.  

The relation is reflexive, symmetric, and transitive, therefore it is an equivalence relation.  
**QED.**  

## Project 6.7
For each of the following relations deﬁned on $\mathbb{Z}$, determine whether it is an equivalence relation. If it is, determine the equivalence classes.  

### (ii) $x\sim y$ if $x\leq y$
No, because the relation $x\leq y$ is not symmetric — $x\leq y$ does not imply $y\leq x$.   

### (iii) $x\sim y$ if $|x| = |y|$
Yes, because the relation $|x| = |y|$ is reflexive, symmetric, and transitive.  
$|x| = |x|$, therefore it is reflexive.  
$|x| = |y|$ $\iff$ $|y| = |x|$, therefore it is symmetric.  
$|x| = |y|$ and $|y| - |z|$ $\iff$ $|x| = |z|$, therefore it is transitive.  

$[a] = \{x \in \mathbb{Z} \text{ | } |a| = |x|\} = \{a, -a\}$  

### (iv) $x\sim y$ if $x \neq y$  
No, because the relation $x \neq y$ is not reflexive — $x\neq x$ is false.  

## Project 6.8
Prove that each of the following relations deﬁned on $\mathbb{Z} \times \mathbb{Z}$ is an equivalence relation. Determine the equivalence classes for each relation.  

## (i) $(x,y)\sim (v,w)$ if $x^2+y^2=v^2+w^2$  
The relation is an equivalence relation because the relation $x^2+y^2=v^2+w^2$ is reflexive, symmetric, and transitive.  
$x^2+y^2=x^2+y^2$, by the reflexive property of equality, therefore the relation is reflexive.  
$x^2+y^2=v^2+w^2 \iff v^2+w^2=x^2+y^2$, by the symmetric property of equality, therefore the relation is symmetric.    
$x^2+y^2=v^2+w^2$ and $v^2+w^2=a^2+b^2$ $\iff$ $x^2+y^2=a^2+b^2$, by the transitive property of equality, therefore the relation is transitive.    
All of the above properties hold true due to the properties of equality.  

Each equivalence class formed by this relation consists of points $(x, y)$ that lie at the same distance from the origin as one another, or in other words all the points of a circle centered around the origin.  

## (ii) $(x,y)\sim (v,w)$ if $y-x^2=w-v^2$
The relation is an equivalence relation because the relation $y-x^2=w-v^2$ is reflexive, symmetric, and transitive, by the same properties of equality as shown part (i).  

Each equivalence class formed by this relation consists of all points $(x, y)$ that satisfy $y-x^2=k$ for some constant $k$. In other words, all the points in an equivalence class are all points on a parabola $y=x^2+k$ for a particular constant $k$, where a different $k$ leads to a different parabola and a different equivalence class.  

## (iii) $(x,y)\sim (v,w)$ if $xy=vw$
The relation is an equivalence relation because the relation $xy=vw$ is reflexive, symmetric, and transitive, by the same properties of equality as shown part (i).  

Each equivalence class formed by this relation consists of all points $(x, y)$ that lie on the curve $y=\frac{k}{x}$, for some constant $k$.  Changing the constant $k$ results in a different curve and a different equivalence class.  