# Homework 12
Prove Props. 8.40, 8.43, 8.49. Do projects 8.44, 8.51, 9.3(i-iii), 9.4

You may use Proposition 8.25A without proof.  
Most of §§8.1-3 is familiar, but not §8.4.  
Don't forget to read the [advice](https://people.math.binghamton.edu/zaslav/330.S25/adv.html#8.25A) page.  

## Proposition 8.25A  
Suppose x, y, z, w ∈ R and x, w ≠ 0. Then $\frac{y}{x}\cdot\frac{z}{w}$ = $\frac{yz}{xw}$.  
Use this freely.  

## Proposition 8.40  
$\text{(i) } x\in\mathbb{R}_{>0} \text{ if and only if } \frac{1}{x}\in\mathbb{R}_{>0}$  

**Proof.**  
We can rewrite this as $x\in\mathbb{R}_{>0}\iff x^{-1}\in\mathbb{R}_{>0}$, by definition of the division operation.  
Since $\mathbb{R}_{>0}$ is defined as $\{x \in\mathbb{R}\text{ | } x > 0\}$, we can rewrite the proposition again as $x>0\iff x^{-1}>0$.  
Axiom 8.5 states that for each $x\in\mathbb{R}-\{0\}$, there exists an inverse $x^{-1}$ where $x\cdot x^{-1}=1$.  
This means that $x$ and $x^{-1}$ must have the same *sign*, that is, either $x, x^{-1}\in\mathbb{R}_{>0}$, or $-x, -x^{-1}\in\mathbb{R}_{>0}$. They cannot have opposite signs, as that would mean $x\cdot x^{-1}=-1$, violating our axiom. This conclusion can be rewritten as $x, x^{-1}>0$, or $-x, -x^{-1}>0$. We have proved that $x^{-1}>0\iff x>0$.  
**QED.**  

$\text{(ii) }$ Let $x,y\in\mathbb{R}_{>0}$. $\text{ If }x<y \text{ then } 0<\frac{1}{y}<\frac{1}{x}$.  



## Theorem 8.43  
$\text{Let } x, y \in \mathbb{R} \text{ such that } x < y. \text{ There exists } z \in \mathbb{R} \text{ such that } x < z < y.$  

**Proof.**  
Given an $x, y \in \mathbb{R} \text{ such that } x < y$, we can construct a $z\in\mathbb{R}$ where $x < z < y$.  
$$z=y-\frac{y-x}{2}$$  
Proof that $x<z$ given $x<y$:  
We know $x<y \iff y-x\in\mathbb{R}_{>0}$  
`/bruh this is a backwards proof`
$x<z \iff x<y-\frac{y-x}{2}$, by substitution of $z$  
$\implies 2x<2y-(y-x)$, by [some proposition]  
$\implies 2x<2y-y-x$, by [some proposition]  
$\implies 2x<y-x$, by [some proposition]  
$\implies 3x<y$, by [some proposition]  

## Proposition 8.49  
$\text{Let } A \subset \mathbb{R} \text{ be nonempty. If } \sup(A) \in A \text{ then } \sup(A) \text{ is the largest}$  
$\text{element of } A\text{, i.e., } \sup(A) = \max(A)\text{. Conversely, if } A \text{ has a largest element then}$  
$\max(A) = \sup(A) \text{ and } \sup(A) \in A\text{.}$  

## Project 8.44
$\text{Construct a subset } A \subseteq \mathbb{R} \text{ that satisfies}$  
$\text{(i) } 1 \in A \text{ and}$  
$\text{(ii) if } n \in A \text{ then } n + 1 \in A\text{,}$  
$\text{yet for which } \mathbb{R}_{>0} \text{ is not a subset of } A\text{.}$    

## Project 8.51  
$\text{For a nonempty set } B \subseteq \mathbb{R} \text{ one can define the greatest lower bound}$  
$\inf(B) \text{ (or infimum) of } B\text{. Give the precise definition for } \inf(B) \text{ and prove that it is}$  
$\text{unique if it exists. Also define } \min(B) \text{ and prove the analogue of Proposition 8.49}$
$\text{for greatest lower bounds and minima.}$  

## Project 9.3  
$\text{Determine which of the following functions are injective, surjective, or bijective. Justify your assertions.}$  

$\text{(i) } f : \mathbb{Z} \to \mathbb{Z}, f(n) = n^2\text{.}$  

This is neither surjective or injective. The image is $\mathbb{Z}_{\geq0}$, while the codomain is $\mathbb{Z}$, therefore it is not surjective.  For both $x=1,-1$, we know $y=1$, therefore it is not injective.  

$\text{(ii) } f : \mathbb{Z} \to \mathbb{Z}_{\geq 0}, f(n) = n^2\text{.}$  

This is surjective, as the image equals the codomain. However, this is not injective, for the same reason as in part $\text{(i)}$.  

$\text{(iii) } f : \mathbb{Z}_{\geq 0} \to \mathbb{Z}_{\geq 0}, f(n) = n^2\text{.}$    

This is bijective, because it is injective and surjective.  It is injective because now the function is strictly monotonic, and will never repeat an output. It is surjective because the image equals the codomain.  

## Project 9.4
$\text{Construct (many) functions that are}$  

$\text{(i) bijective;}$  

$f(x)=x$  
The outputs of the function never repeat, therefore it is injective. The image is $\mathbb{R}$, therefore it is surjective. Since it is injective and surjective, it is bijective.  

$\text{(ii) injective, but not surjective;}$  

$f(x)=\frac{1}{x}$  
The outputs of the function never repeat, therefore it is injective. The image is $\mathbb{R}-\{0\}$, while the codomain is $\mathbb{R}$, therefore it is not surjective.  

$\text{(iii) surjective, but not injective;}$  

$f(x)=x^{3}+2x^{2}$  
The image is $\mathbb{R}$, so it is surjective. It has 2 distinct roots, making it not injective. 

$\text{(iv) neither injective nor surjective.}$  

$f(x)=x^2$  
The image is $\mathbb{R}_{\geq0}$, while the codomain is $\mathbb{R}$, therefore it is not surjective.  For both $x=1,-1$, we know $y=1$, therefore it is not injective.  