# Homework 14
Do Project 11.11. Prove Props. 13.1, 13.3, 13.6, 13.13. (F 5/2)  
Study Thm. 10.1, ยง10.2 def. of |x|, ยง10.3 distance from x to y.  
ยง11.1: Know def. of rational numbers.  
ยง11.2: Study Prop. 11.10.   

## Proposition 13.1  
There exists no bijection $[1]\to [n]$ when $n>1$.  

**Proof.**  

We revisit the definition of a function:  
A function $A\to B$, is really a set $\Gamma\subset(A\times B)$ such that for each $a\in A$ there is **one and only one** element of $\Gamma$ whose first entry is $a$.  

Let $f : [1]\to [n]$.  $[1]$ is defined as $\{1\}$, so $f : \{1\}\to [n]$.  
This function $f$ can be rewritten as the set $\Gamma_f\subseteq (\{1\}\times [n])$, where there must exist one and only one entry with $1$ as the first element.  
Therefore, the only valid sets for $\Gamma_f$ are $\{(1, b)\}$, for some arbitrary $b\in [n]$.  
By definition of $[n]$, when $n>1$, $\{1, 2\}\subseteq [n]$.  
Since $b$ is a single element and $\{1, 2\}\subseteq [n]$, without loss of generality, there will be at least one element of $[n]$ that is not present as the second element in any $(a,b)\in\Gamma_f$. Therefore, $f$ is not surjective.  

As $f$ is not surjective, $f$ cannot be a bijection.  

**QED.**  

## Proposition 13.3
If $1 \leq k \leq n$ then the function

$$g_k : [n-1] \to [n]-\{k\}$$

defined by

$$g_k(j) := 
\begin{cases}
j & \text{if } j < k, \\
j+1 & \text{if } j \geq k
\end{cases}$$

is a bijection.  

## Proposition 13.6  
Every subset of a finite set is finite.  

**Proof.**  

Let $A$ be a finite set, and let $B\subseteq A$.  
By defintion, for some $n\in\mathbb{N}$, there exists a bijection $f : [n] \to A$.  
We need to prove:  
For some $m\in\mathbb{N}$, there exists a bijection $g : [m] \to B$.  

man https://math.stackexchange.com/questions/239566/subset-of-a-finite-set-is-finite

## Proposition 13.13  
$\mathbb{Z}$ is countable.  

**Proof.**  

We construct a bijection $f : \mathbb{N}\to \mathbb{Z}$.  

We define $f$ as follows:  

| $n$   | $f(n)$ |
| ----- | ------ |
| $1$   | $0$    |
| $2$   | $-1$   |
| $3$   | $1$    |
| $4$   | $-2$   |
| $5$   | $2$    |
| $...$ | $...$  |

Or more formally:  
$$f(n) := 
\begin{cases}
\frac{n-1}{2} & \text{if } n \text{ is odd}, \\
-\frac{n}{2} & \text{if } n \text{ is even}
\end{cases}$$  

**Prove: $f$ is injective.**  

We need to prove that for any $n_1, n_2\in \mathbb{N}, f(n_1)=f(n_2)\implies n_1=n_2$.  

Let $f(n_1)=f(n_2)$.  

Case 1: $n_1, n_2$ are even.  

Then we have $f(n_1)=f(n_2)\iff -\frac{n_1}{2}=-\frac{n_2}{2}$.  
Multiplying both sides by $2$: $-n_1=-n_2$  
Multiplying both sides by $-1$: $n_1=n_2$  

Case 2: $n_1, n_2$ are odd.  

Then we have $f(n_1)=f(n_2)\iff \frac{n_1-1}{2}=\frac{n_2-1}{2}$.  
Multiplying both sides by $2$: $n_1-1=n_2-1$  
Add $1$ to both sides: $n_1=n_2$  

Case 3: $n_1$ is even and $n_2$ is odd.  
Then we have $f(n_1)=f(n_2)\iff -\frac{n_1}{2}=\frac{n_2-1}{2}$.  
Multiplying both sides by $2$: $-n_1=n_2-1$.  
Since $n_1, n_2\in\mathbb{N}$, we know $-n_1 < 0$, but $n_2-1 \geq 0$, so $-n_1\neq n_2-1$. Therefore, since $2f(n_1)\neq 2f(n_2)$, but we assumed $f(n_1)=f(n_2)$, by contradiction, $n_1$ cannot be even and $n_2$ cannot be odd simultaneously.  

Case 4: $n_1$ is odd and $n_2$ is even.  
Then we have $f(n_1)=f(n_2)\iff \frac{n_1-1}{2}=-\frac{n_2}{2}$.  
Multiplying both sides by $2$: $n_1-1=-n_2$.  
Since $n_1, n_2\in\mathbb{N}$, we know $-n_2 < 0$, but $n_1-1 \geq 0$, so $n_1-1\neq -n_2$. Therefore, since $2f(n_1)\neq 2f(n_2)$, but we assumed $f(n_1)=f(n_2)$, by contradiction, $n_1$ cannot be odd and $n_2$ cannot be even simultaneously.  

$\therefore f$ is injective.   

**Prove: $f$ is surjective.**  

We need to prove that for all $z\in\mathbb{Z}$, there exists a $n\in\mathbb{N}$ where $z=f(n)$.  

Case 1: $z\geq0$.  
We can let $n=2z+1$. By proposition 6.15, this means $n$ is odd.  
Now, show $z=f(n)$.  
Since $n$ is odd, $f(n)=\frac{n-1}{2}=\frac{(2z+1)-1}{2}=\frac{2z}{2}=z$.  

Case 2: $z<0$.  
We can let $n=-2z$, which is even.     
Since $n$ is even, $f(n)=-\frac{n}{2}=-\frac{-2z}{2}=z$.  

We have shown that for any $z\in\mathbb{Z}$, there exists a $n\in\mathbb{N}$ where $z=f(n)$.  Therefore, $f$ is surjective.  

Since $f$ is injective and surjective, by definition, it is bijective.  

**QED.**  
