# Homework 15
Prove Thm. 13.14, Cors. 13.18, 13.23, Thm. 13.28

## Theorem 13.14  
$\mathbb{Z}\times \mathbb{Z}$ is countable.  

## Corollary 13.18  
$\mathbb{Q}$ is countable.  

**Proof.**  

We denote the set $P=\mathbb{Z}\times(\mathbb{Z}-\{0\})$.  We know $P$ is countable by Corollary 13.17.  
By Proposition 13.9, since $P$ is countable there exists a surjection $f:\mathbb{N}\to P$.  

We now define a function $g : P \to \mathbb{Q}$ by:  
$$g((a,b))=\frac{a}{b}$$  

By definition, $x\in\mathbb{Q}$ if $x=\frac{a}{b}$, where $a,b\in\mathbb{Z}$ and $b\neq 0$. These conditions can be restated as $a\in\mathbb{Z}$ and $b\in(\mathbb{Z}-\{0\})$. Take any $a\in\mathbb{Z}$ and $b\in(\mathbb{Z}-\{0\})$. We can construct a tuple $(a,b)\in P$, therefore $g$ is a surjection.  

Since $f$ and $g$ are surjections, $g\circ f : \mathbb{N}\to \mathbb{Q}$ is also a surjection.  
$\therefore$ a surjection from $\mathbb{N}\to\mathbb{Q}$ exists, so by Proposition 13.9, $\mathbb{Q}$ is countable.  

**QED.**  

## Corollary 13.23  
The set $\mathbb{R}-\mathbb{Q}$ of irrational numbers is uncountable.  

**Proof.**  

Assume, by way of contradiction, that $\mathbb{R}-\mathbb{Q}$ is countable. By Corollary 13.18, we know $\mathbb{Q}$ is countable. 

By Proposition 13.19, $(\mathbb{R}-\mathbb{Q})\cup \mathbb{Q}$ must be countable, however, $(\mathbb{R}-\mathbb{Q})\cup \mathbb{Q}$ is just the set $\mathbb{R}$, and by Theorem 13.22, we know $\mathbb{R}$ is not countable. 

By contradiction, $\mathbb{R}-\mathbb{Q}$ must not be countable.  

**QED.**  

## Corollary 13.28  
All open intervals have the same cardinality.  

**Proof.**  

By Theorem 13.25, every open interval $(a,b)$ for $a,b\in\mathbb{R}$ has the same cardinality as $\mathbb{R}$. If every open interval has the same cardinality as $\mathbb{R}$, then by transitivity every one of those intervals has the same cardinality.  

**QED.**  